So let's go ahead, and go set this up.
We're gonna pop over to our code sandbox,
that's fine.
We're gonna go into heapsort.
Okay, and then I gave you,
you do not have to do it this way.
I'm just trying to kind
of help you along and
give you the skeleton of how to do this.
I suggest you break this down
into three functions, right,
heapsort which is actually
what's gonna be called.
Then this function called heapify, which
is just my favorite word in this entire
course is it there's some
good words in this course but
heapify is a pretty good one.
This is actually that
process that's gonna check.
Okay, am I in the right place?
Am I bigger than my children?
Do I need to swap these?
So that would take in the array,
the index and
the heap size and then you can figure
out where you need to move things.
And then createMaxHeap.
This is basically going to be the function
that just loops over your array and
calls heapify in reverse order.
I actually even gave you here in
the course notes, the loop, right,
this is the loop that you're going
to write of what to loop over.
This is the for loop that you're going
to put inside of your createMaxHeap.
The reason I gave this
to this because it took
me way too long to figure this out myself.
I didn't want you to have to struggle on
something that didn't seem like it was
that useful too.
Cool, and then you'll put that
here inside of createMaxHeap.
And then I wrote one more function
here just called swapPlace.
Just takes a index1,
index2 and an array.
And all this does is swap
two items in an array,
because you have to do so
much swapping in here.
It's nice to just have kind of a helper
function that does it for you.
Again, I'm just kind of
throwing out ideas here.
You're welcome to do however,
we're where you see fit.
There's not much recursion in here, the
only place that you're gonna use a little
bit of recursion is inside of heapify.
So heapify does call itself sometimes
Let's hop into this heapsort function.
I don't know why I feel like I have
to like extra emphasize the P in
heap,but every time it says heap sort,
I don't know.
Anyway, array=createMaxHeap(array).
Okay, so we're gonna go into it.
We'll create a MaxHeap down here and
this function down here, but
after that point we'll have a MaxHeap.
Then all we're gonna do is we're
gonna say let i=array.length-1.
So we're gonna start from the back, right?
I is greater than 0.
Obviously we don't need
a heapify on 0 with time, right,
because once everything has been swapped,
inherently the last number or
the first number, the 0 with index will
be the smallest item in the array.
Hence the greater than and
not greater than or equal, and then i- -.
Okay, so
we're going backwards over the array.
All we're gonna do is we're going to
call swap place, 0, i, an array.
And then all we're gonna do
is say heapify(array 0, i).
Okay, so this is the core sorting
part of the algorithm right here.
Create a MaxHeap,
then just work backwards over the array,
swap places, and
then call heapify, that's it.
CreateMaxHeap, let's do swap place first
because that's what I have my notes first.
Pretty simple, you're just gonna say,
let temp = array[index 1] array[index
1] is signed array[index2].
Array[index2] is assigned
temp return array.
Okay, that's swap place.
Let's go down and do,
CreateMaxHeap, this one.
Here we're gonna say, for and
we're just going to do that, for
loop that I was talking about let i
= math.floor, (array.length/2)-1.
I is greater than or equal to 0, i--.
Kind of a bit of a mouthful there.
Okay, and then we just call heapify
on array, i and then array.length.
So you might be asking,
what is this length?
This heapSize, right,
is because as we're sorting our array,
the length of our array kind of changes,
right.
Because as we're doing this part.
This i's was changing, right?
So that everything before
the i in here is sorted.
So we want to exclude those
from our heapify, right?
So going back to here, basically when
we're starting arriving to here, right?
We want to kind of remove
these from our heap.
These two are no longer
children in our heap, right?
So that's what that array size
of the heap size represents,
as we want to say everything
in here is the unsorted heap.
Everything over here is
the sorted part of the array.
We kind of divide our array that way.
And what's keeping track of
that is this heapSize variable.
That's when you're doing a createMax Heap.
You're just passing
array.length as the heapSize.
Whereas this changes here for
this heapify code.
Hopefully makes a little bit of sense.
All right, let's get into the heapify.
This is just a lot of
conditional logic here.
So let's grab the left and
the right child.
That's the first thing we'll do,
left =2* index + 1, right?
And same thing here,
right, is that + 2, okay?
So for whatever item in our array here
the index we now have the left child and
the right child.
And we're going to
say if heapSize>left and
array(largest) let's see.
I forgot to do this variable as well.
Let largestvalueindex=index.
And so what I'm just gonna keep track
of in this particular variable is,
where is the largest values index, and
then I'll just use if statements to check.
I'm sure there's a more elegant
way you could probably do this.
I was just trying to be clear.
So largestvalueindex> array( left),
then largestvalueindex is assigned left.
And then we'll ask the same question for
the right side.
In fact, you could probably even just copy
and paste it and modify it a little bit.
Change this to right.
In fact,
everything just changes to the right yep,
so right, right, right.
So I had to change right
three different times there.
Okay, so after asking these two questions.
We all know is the parent,
the left child or the right child,
the largest item of
those particular three.
And then all I have to do
here is I have to say,
if largestvalueindex
is not equal to index.
So basically do I need to do something if,
so first thing, swapPlace of index,
largestvalueindex and array, okay.
So this will actually do like the swapping
that we were talking about and then.
We just need to make sure that we
call heapify on the child array,
largestvalueindex and heapSize.
That's it should be.
Let's go ahead and run this make sure
that I'm not telling you sweet little
lies, And none to do that.
But that, it's not running.
Why is this not running, please run.
I didn't call it the test
I skip down there.
Now let's try it.
Run, run, run, run, one failed.
Array is undefined, and where's that?
14.
CreateMaxHeap, I didn't return the array,
return array.
So line 23 there,
I had to put a return array.
Let's try that again.
There you go, that worked.
So yeah, make sure down here you
are returning the array though honestly.
You could have just said create
Max because it modifies the array
itself anyway.
Right, make sure that I'm not
telling you more lies But
yeah, that should work, it does.
Either way, we'll leave it like
that because I have it in my notes.
I like doing things like this
where I say it's assigned to this.
So people are aware,
hey array here it's getting overwritten,
despite the fact that semantically
it ends up being the same thing.
Okay, any questions about heapsort?
>> Yeah, confused by recursion.
What's your base case,
how does it exit, how does it stop?
>> Yeah, so the question is,
what's the base case in the recursion?
Valid question because typically
we want to put it up here, right?
So it's pretty obvious, in this particular
case, the base case is when you
start going out like either a swap
doesn't happen or you go out of bounds.
So I guess that either case,
it's when a swap doesn't happen, right?
So this only happens when
largest value index changes, and
eventually you're going to go
outside of your array, right?
So, eventually you're going to
start asking the question is like,
looking at this one, Like 7,
right, or index 8 here.
This doesn't have any children,
therefore swap cannot happen, right?
And therefore that's the base cases
when there's no swap to happen.
Does that make sense?
>> Yeah, it makes sense.
>> Cool, good question,
thank you, other questions?
So how does the number
heapSize change over time?
Is that a fair assessment of the question?
>> Yes, that's correct,
I just forgot the link.
>> That's good, yeah, it's a weird word.
So the,
how does the heapSize change over time?
So let's talk about because
heapify is going to change and
we kind of use it in two different places.
It does the same thing.
But we use it in two different ways,
kind of.
So the first time we use it is
here instead of createMaxHeap.
And this is where we were
starting in the middle.
Again, if we go up to my example up here,
right,
we start here,
when we're doing createMaxHeap.
And the reason why we don't start there is
because these don't have children, right?
So we would never have to swap them with
anything because they have no children
to swap with.
So we start here because this is the first
one to guarantee to have a child, right?
So here, the entire array is the heap.
We have nothing on the sorted
part of the array yet,
this entire thing is considered the heap.
Therefore, that's why here,
the heapSize is the array.length.
Now when we get down to this part here,
which is we're actually doing the sorting.
Let's scroll down to that.
Now the heap size is not actually all
ten elements of the arrays, right?
Now the heap size is just index 8 and
below, right?
So the first 9 elements in the array.
So that's why heapSize on this very,
very first iteration.
There's gonna be a 9, yeah 9.
And that's gonna decrease over time,
right?
Because this sorted part of the race you
have 10 here, then 9, then 8, then 7.
So it's just gonna work backwards,
until eventually,
the entire array ends up being sorted.